In this lecture, we're
going to review some of
the basic statistical
testing in Python.
We're going to talk about
hypothesis testing,
statistical
significance, and using
SciPy to run
the student's t-test.
We use statistics a lot
in different ways
in data science,
and in this lecture
I want to refresh
your knowledge of
hypothesis testing,
which is a core data
analysis activity
behind experimentation.
The goal of hypothesis testing
is to determine if for instance
the two different
conditions we have in
an experiment have resulted
in different impacts.
So let's import our usual
NumPy and pandas libraries,
this is np and pandas as pd.
Now, let's bring in some new
libraries from SciPy.
So from SciPy I want
to import stats.
Now SciPy is an
interesting collection
of libraries for data science,
and you'll use most or perhaps
all of these libraries.
It includes NumPy and pandas,
but also plotting libraries
such as Matplotlib and
a number of other scientific
library functions as well.
When we do hypothesis testing,
we actually have
two statements of interest.
The first is
our actual explanation,
which we call the
alternative hypothesis,
and the second is that
the explanation we have is
not sufficient and we call
this the null hypothesis.
Our actual testing method
is to determine
whether the null hypothesis
is true or not.
If we find that there is
a difference between
groups then we can
reject the null hypothesis and
we accept our alternative.
So let's see an example of this.
We're going to use
some grade data.
So make a new DataFrame
here and read _csv
(datasets/grades.csv).
Let's look at the head of that.
If we take a look
at the DataFrame
inside we have
six different assignments.
Let's look at some summary
statistics for this DataFrame.
So I'm just going to
print out the number
of rows and columns,
and remember the DataFrame has
a shape and we'll just
pass those as variables.
All right, for the purpose
of this lecture let's
segment this population
into two pieces.
Let's say those who finish
the first assignment by
the end of December 2015,
we'll call them early finishers,
and those who finish
at sometime after
that we'll call them
late finishers.
So I'll create some new variable,
early finishers equals DataFrame.
I'm going to do a pd.to_datetime.
So I'm going to convert
that column to date_time.
We could have done
this when we read in
the CSV file as well.
I want to take that
assignment one submission
time and just if
it's less than 2016.
So then let's take a look
at our early finishers.
So you've got lots of
skills now with pandas.
How would you go about getting
the late finishers DataFrame?
Why don't you pause
this video and give it a try?
All right, here's my solution.
First, the DataFrame df and
the early finishers
share index values.
So I really just
want everything in
the df which is not
in early finishers.
So I'll create late finishers
and I'll make that
equal to our original DataFrame,
and then I'll take the inverse of
df.index.isin
early_finishers.index.
So here the tilde is
a bit wise compliment.
So we're just taking all of
our true values and
negating them to false and
taking all our false values
and negating them back
into true values.
Let's take a look at the head.
So there are a lot of
other ways to do this.
For instance, you
could just copy and
paste the first
projection and change
the sign from less than two
greater than or equal to.
This is okay.
But if you decide you want
to change the date down
the road you have to remember
to change it in two places.
You could also do a join of
the DataFrame df with
early finishers.
If you do a left join you only
keep the items in
the left DataFrame.
So this would have
been a good answer.
You also could have
written a function that
determines if someone
is early or late and
then call.apply on the DataFrame
and added a new column
to the DataFrame.
This is a pretty
reasonable answer as well.
So there's a number of
different things you could have
done to create this DataFrame.
As you've seen, the pandas
DataFrame object has
a variety of statistical
functions associated with it.
If we call the mean function
directly on the DataFrame,
we see that each of the means for
the assignments are calculated.
Let's compare the means
for our two populations.
So I'm just going to
print the early finishers
assignment1_grade.mean.
I'm going to do
the same thing with
the late finishers and
let's take a look.
So these look pretty similar
but are they the same?
What do we mean by similar?
This is where the
student's t-test comes in.
It allows us to form
the alternative hypotheses,
these are different,
as well as the null hypothesis,
these are the same, and then
test that null hypothesis.
When doing hypothesis testing,
we have to choose
a significance level as
a threshold for how much of
a chance we're willing to accept.
This significance level is
typically called Alpha.
For this example, yet let's use
a threshold of 0.05
for our Alpha,
which is five percent.
Now this is commonly used number
but it's really quite arbitrary.
The SciPy library
contains a number of
different statistical
tests and forms
a basis for hypothesis
testing in Python.
We're going to use the
ttest_ind() function,
which does an independent t-test,
meaning that the populations in
the two groups are not
related to one another.
The result of t-ttest_ind()
are this t statistic
and the p-value.
It's this latter value
the probability which is
most important to us as it
indicates the chance
between zero and
one of our null
hypothesis being true.
So let's bring in
ttest_ind() function.
So from SciPy stats
import ttest_ind().
Let's run this function
with our two populations.
We're going to look at
the assignment one grades.
So ttest_ind(), we'll
take early finishers and
we just want to project
the assignment1_grade
and late finishers
and we'll project
the assignment1_grade.
So here we see that
the probability is 0.18.
This is above our
Alpha value of 0.05.
This means that we cannot
reject the null hypothesis.
The null hypothesis was
that the two populations
are the same.
We don't have enough certainty
in our evidence because
the probability is greater than
Alpha to come to a conclusion
to the contrary.
This doesn't mean
that we've proven
that the populations
are the same.
So why don't we check
the other assignment grades.
So I'm just going to
copy and paste here.
So I'm going to put it in
the assignment2_grade,
assignment3_grade
assignment4 _ grade,
five and I think there
are six assignments here.
Okay, so it looks like in
this data we do not have
enough evidence to suggest
the populations differ
with respect to grade.
Let's look at those p-values
for a moment though
because they're saying
things that can inform
experimental design down the road.
For instance, one
of the assignments,
assignment3 has a
p-value around 0.1.
This means that if
we accept a level of
chance similarity of 11 percent,
this would have been considered
statistically significant.
As a researcher, this would
suggest to me that there's
a number of things here worth
considering following up on.
For instance, if we had
a small number of participants,
and we don't here,
or if there was something unique
about this assignment as it
relates to our experiment
whatever the experiment was,
then there may be
followup experiments
that we could run to better
understand the phenomenon.
Now, p-values have come under
fire recently for
being insufficient for
telling us enough
about the interactions
which are happening and
two other techniques
confidence intervals
and Bayesian analyses
are being used more regularly.
One issue with p-values is that
as you run more
tests you're likely
to get a value which is
statistically significant
just by chance.
So let's see a little
simulation of this.
First, let's create
a DataFrame of 100 columns
each with a 100 numbers.
So here I'm going to
do dF1 pd.DataFrame,
and then we'll put in
a nice list comprehension.
Np.random.normal random
100 for x in range 100.
Let's look at the head of that.
Now, pause this and reflect.
Do you understand
the list comprehension
and how I created this DataFrame?
You don't have to use a list
comprehension to do this,
but you should be
able to read this
and figure it out because this is
a commonly used
approach that you'll
find on web forms
and then help forms.
Okay. Let's create
a second DataFrame.
So here we'll just do
the same thing dF2 equals
pd.DataFrame and I could
have a list comprehension.
What I'm saying here is I want to
call the statement
np.random.random100.
So this will generate
100 random values into it in
a list for x in range 100.
So I want to iterate over
another list of 100 values.
I'm actually not using X here.
It's just being thrown away
because the data that I'm
using is the np.random.random.
So are these two
DataFrames the same?
Maybe a better question is
for a given row inside of
dF1 is it the same as
that same row inside of df2.
So let's take a look. Let's
say our critical value
here is 0.1 or an Alpha
of 10 percent.
We're going to compare
each column in
dF1 to the same
numbered column in
df2 and we'll report when
the p-value isn't
less than 10 percent,
which means that we have
sufficient evidence
to say that the columns
are different.
So let's write this as a
function called test_columns.
So def tests_columns.
We'll pass a parameter Alpha
by default we'll set it to 0.1.
We can change that later though,
so it's nice to have a parameter.
I want to keep track of how
many columns actually differ,
so make some new variable
num_diff and make it zero.
Now, we're just going to
iterate over the columns.
So for call in dF1.columns,
we're just iterating over
all the list of columns in
dF1 we're just going to run
our t-test in between
the two DataFrames.
So we're going to
get a test stat and
p-value is equal to ttests_ind().
We'll do dF1 sub call
and df2 sub call.
Remember t-tests end
returns two values.
We can use tuple
unpacking here to get
the test stat in its variable
and the probability in it.
We're going to check the
p-value versus the Alphas,
so if the p-value is less
than or equal to Alpha
and now we're just going
to print out if they're
different and increment
the number of difference.
So column is statistically
significantly different
at some Alpha level,
some pval level and will
pass our parameters.
Of course, let's increment
our number of differences.
Let's print out
some summary stats
after were done testing
all the columns.
So the total number
of different ones
we'll place that in
and we'll turn it
into a percentage and we'll
just do the math with
the length of columns.
Now let's actually run this code.
So ttests_columns.
Interesting. So we
see that there's
a bunch of columns that
are actually different.
In fact, that number looks
a lot like the Alpha
value we chose.
So what's going on shouldn't
all of the columns be the same?
Remember, that
all t-test does is check if
two sets are similar given
some level of confidence
in our case 10 percent.
The more random
comparisons you do,
the more will just happen
to be the same by chance.
In this example, we
checked 100 columns.
So we would expect there
to be roughly 10 of
them to be the same
if our Alpha was 0.1.
So we can test some other
Alpha values as well.
So let's do tests columns with
0.05 and you could try
other values as well.
So keep this in mind
when you're doing
statistical tests like
the t-test which has a p-value.
Understand that this p-value
isn't magic and it has
a threshold for
you when reporting
results and trying to
answer your hypothesis.
What's a reasonable threshold?
That depends on your question
and you need to engage
domain experts to better
understand what they would
consider significant.
So just for fun, let's recreate
that second DataFrame using
a non-normal distribution.
I'm going to arbitrarily
choose chi-squared.
You can try some other ones
if you'd like.
So we'll just df2
equals pd.DataFrame
and now we'll just do
np.random.chi-squared.
Now chi-squared is
a distribution actually
takes parameter
the degrees of freedom.
I'll just set it to one here.
You can read about that or
maybe you already know about
the chi-squared distribution
and I want 100 values
and we're going to iterate
over 100 columns as well.
Let's just test that.
So now we see that
all or most columns tests to be
statistically significant
at the 10 percent level.
In this lecture, we've
discussed just some of
the basics of hypothesis
testing in Python.
I introduced you to
the SciPy library.
Which you can use for
the student's t-tests.
We've discussed some of
the practical issues
which arise from looking at
statistical significance.
Now, there's much more to learn
about hypothesis testing.
For instance, there are
different tests to be used
depending on the shape of
your data and different ways to
report on the results instead of
just p values such as
confidence intervals
or Bayesian analysis.
But this should give
you a basic idea
of where to start when comparing
two populations for differences
which is a common task
for data scientists.